Title: Dealing with errors encountered by charm hooks  

# Hook errors

If any of your hooks returns a non-zero exit code, juju will stop managing the
unit directly and will wait for user intervention. This is a Bad Thing, and you
should make every effort to avoid it, because the average user may not be in a
position to diagnose the fault with any great degree of sophistication.

So, in general, you should write your hooks as robustly as possible: if an
operation suffers a possibly-transient failure, it's wise to wait a moment and
retry a couple of times, to avoid needlessly bothering the user with a decision
or call to action that they're not necessarily equipped to make.

However, you will no doubt encounter errors on occasion -- in particular, if the
unit agent is aborted while it's running a hook, it'll set an error status for
that hook when it comes back up. You will in that case have to deal with users'
potentially underinformed responses to those errors.

## Error status

When a unit agent sets an error status, it stops running hooks and relinquishes
control over the charm directory. This means that it's generally safe to `juju
ssh` into the unit and use it as though you were the sole administrator; juju
will only take back control of the directory when explicitly requested, in
response to either `juju resolved` or `juju upgrade-charm --force`.

  - `juju resolved` causes the unit to unblock itself and continue as though the
    hook had completed successfully. The ideal charm will be aware of this
    possibility and will therefore trust information from its
    [environment](./authors-hook-environment.html) to be more recent and correct
    than anything it may have previously have recorded in the local
    [charm directory](./authors-charm-components.html).
  - `juju resolved --retry` reverts the charm directory's contents to whatever
    they were at the start of the failed hook, and runs the hook again exactly as
    before. This, in combination with the [debug-hooks](./authors-hook-debug.html)
    command, is your main entry point for investigating an error in detail. If the
    hook fails again when retried, it will set an error as before and wait again
    for user resolution.
  - `juju upgrade-charm --force` merges into the charm directory the contents of
    the newer charm version, and continues blocking in the original hook error
    state. Each time a new upgrade is forced, the charm directory is rolled back
    to the state from which it was originally upgraded before proceeding; this means
    that a forced upgrade back to the original charm will always be a no-op,
    regardless of what other upgrade attempts have been made in the interim.

Once you have issued one of the above commands, the charm directory should once
again be treated as inaccessible.

## Charm upgrade errors

Finally, there's another reason a unit might set an error status: a [charm
upgrade](./developer-upgrade-charm.html) conflict, which should never happen
except during development.

They can be resolved either by forcing an upgrade to a different charm version,
or by manually resolving the conflicts in the charm directory and running
`juju resolved` to cause the unit agent to continue.

## Charm integrity errors

Some charms use symlinks to redirect hook execution to a common file. Naturally
these symlinks must be preserved to allow proper operation of the charm. If you
are developing a charm and manually copy it over to a system, you should verify
that the hook symlinks are preserved as expected. For example, `scp` will follow
symlinks, not replicate them, which can lead to a broken charm.

We recommend using either `rsync` or generating a tarball of your charm first if you're going to use `scp`.
