Title: Juju environment variables  

<!---
Curated list of variables generated by running this against juju-core:

grep -r JUJU_ * | perl -ne 'if (/(JUJU_[A-Z_]+)/) { print "$1\n"; }'|sort | uniq

Use header tags so we can link to these variables individually.
--->

# Environment Variables

## Juju Client

These variables are available on the juju client in order to change its default
behavior.


#### JUJU_DATA

This sets the path where Juju will look for its configuration files. You do not
need to set this - by default Juju follows XDG guidelines and on Linux systems
it will use the path:

```no-highlight
~/.local/share/juju
```

#### JUJU_HOME (Deprecated)

For versions of Juju prior to 2.0, this variable indicated the 'home' directory
where Juju kept configuration and other data.

```
JUJU_HOME=~/.juju
```

#### JUJU_REPOSITORY

This allows you to set the repository that Juju looks for charms in. This can
also be done by passing `--repository=/path/to/charms` when running the command
`juju deploy`.

For example, if you are running juju in a Vagrant virtual machine, you could
set `JUJU_REPOSITORY` to your shared folder:

```
export JUJU_REPOSITORY=/vagrant
juju deploy local:series/charm
```

#### JUJU_LOGGING_CONFIG

This setting takes effect on an environment only at bootstrap time. In stable
Juju releases, agents are started with logging set to WARNING, and units are set
to INFO. Development releases are set to DEBUG globally. Post bootstrap, on a
running environment you can change the logging options to be more or less
verbose. For example:

```
juju set-environment logging-config "juju=DEBUG; unit=WARNING"
```

#### JUJU_DEV_FEATURE_FLAGS

This setting takes effect on an environment only at bootstrap time. Unstable
or pre-release features are enabled only when the feature flag is enabled prior
to bootstrapping the environment.

```
JUJU_DEV_FEATURE_FLAGS=storage,network-spaces juju bootstrap
```

#### JUJU_STARTUP_LOGGING_CONFIG

This setting takes effect on an environment only at bootstrap time, and is
used to set the verbosity of the bootstrap process. For example, to troubleshoot
a failure bootstrapping during provider development, you can set the log level
to TRACE.
```
JUJU_STARTUP_LOGGING_CONFIG=TRACE juju bootstrap
```

#### JUJU_CLI_VERSION

This allows you to change the behavior of the command line interface (CLI)
between major Juju releases and exists as a compatibility flag for those users
wishing to enable the newer behavior of the Juju CLI. As the CLI output and
behavior is stable between minor releases of Juju, setting JUJU_CLI_VERSION
will enable developers and users to preview the newer behavior of the CLI.

```
export JUJU_CLI_VERSION=2
juju status
```

# Building

These variables are available to the `charm build` process.

#### LAYER_PATH

Sets the location to search for charm-layers. If
no layer is found in this location, it defaults to searching the directory
at `interfaces.juju.solutions` for the requested charm-layer.

```
LAYER_PATH=$JUJU_REPOSITORY/layers
```

#### INTERFACE_PATH

Sets the location to search for interface-layers. If
no interface is found in this location, it defaults to searching the directory
at `interfaces.juju.solutions` for the requested interface-layer.


```
INTERFACE_PATH=$JUJU_REPOSITORY/interfaces
```


# Unit

These variables are available to charms during hook execution.

#### JUJU_ACTION_NAME

The name of the currently executing action
```
JUJU_ACTION_NAME=backup
```

#### JUJU_ACTION_TAG

A concatenation of `JUJU_ACTION_UUID` and the word 'action'

```
JUJU_ACTION_TAG=action-97db750c-c7d7-47a4-8b57-9cc3e85f8153
```

#### JUJU_ACTION_UUID

The current UUID of the executing action
```
JUJU_ACTION_UUID=97db750c-c7d7-47a4-8b57-9cc3e85f8153
```

#### JUJU_API_ADDRESSES

A space-separated list of API servers.
```
JUJU_API_ADDRESSES=10.10.10.1:17070
```

#### JUJU_AGENT_SOCKET

The socket that the Unit Agent uses to communicate with individual Units.
```
JUJU_AGENT_SOCKET=@/var/lib/juju/agents/unit-postgresql-0/agent.socket
```

#### JUJU_CHARM_DIR

The path to the currently executing charm directory.
```
JUJU_CHARM_DIR=/var/lib/juju/agents/unit-postgresql-0/charm
```

#### JUJU_CONTEXT_ID

Used by juju to communicate to ask a running agent to execute a command on juju's behalf.
```
JUJU_CONTEXT_ID=postgresql/0:db-relation-joined:34317605475203611
```

#### JUJU_DEBUG

The temporary directory where `juju debug-hooks` is spawned from.
```
JUJU_DEBUG=/tmp/tmp.vGQlc2bTcV
```

#### JUJU_MODEL_NAME

The human-friendly name of the current model.
```
JUJU_MODEL_NAME=default
```

#### JUJU_MODEL_UUID

The unique identifier of the juju model.
```
JUJU_MODEL_UUID=2c0896ce-fd6c-4647-8540-26f848e061f9
```

#### JUJU_HOOK_NAME

The name of the hook being executed.
```
JUJU_HOOK_NAME=db-relation-joined
```

#### JUJU_MACHINE_ID

The ID of the machine that's currently executing the hook
```
JUJU_MACHINE_ID=1
```

#### JUJU_RELATION

The relation name being executed.
```
JUJU_RELATION=db
```

#### JUJU_RELATION_ID

The ID of the relation being executed.
```
JUJU_RELATION_ID=db:20
```

#### JUJU_REMOTE_UNIT

The name of the current related unit.
```
JUJU_REMOTE_UNIT=reddit/0
```

#### JUJU_UNIT_NAME

The name of the local unit being executed.
```
JUJU_UNIT_NAME=vanilla/0
```


# Internal Use only

These exist for developmental purposes only.

#### JUJU_DUMMY_DELAY
#### JUJU_NOTEST_MONGOJS
#### JUJU_AVAILABILITY_ZONE
